# Types
- DSM uses two major categories of substance-related disorders:
	- **Substance use disorders:** Patterns of *maladaptive behaviour involving the use of a psychoactive substance*. Substance-use disorders include *substance-abuse* disorders and *substance dependence* disorders. 
	- **Substance-induced disorders:** Disorders *induced by the use of psychoactive substances*, including intoxication, withdrawal syndromes, mood disorders, delirium, and amnesia.
	- Withdrawal symptoms are **OPOSITE** of the drug effect
- Other addictive disorders
	- Problem gambling behaviour was considered an *impulse control disorder* in former editions of the DSM. In DSM-5, *gambling disorder* is classified with other substance use disorders. Gambling disorder has commonalities in expression, causes, comorbidity, and treatment with substance use disorders. 
	- The broader category, though not formally mentioned in DSM is process addictions. – Partial exception is *Internet Gaming Disorder* (Conditions for further study: in Appendix 3)

# Hallmarks of Disordered Substance Use
- Tachycardia
- Delirium tremens
	- Alcohol causes disruption of *thymine* (vitamin B1)
	- tremens = shaky
	- delirium = symptoms of delirium
	- Very high quantities of alcohol over at least a month, and then stopping
	- treatment:
		- thymine (vitamin B1) supplements
		- other, non alcohol, CNS depressant
- Delirium
- Disorientation
- Physiological dependence (Addiction)
	- Tolerance
		- Consume more and more without getting the effect
	- Withdrawal
		- Body compensating causes opposite, unpleasant effects
- Psychological Dependence
	- Happens without actual Physiological dependence
# DSM-5: Substance Use Disorder (eg., Alcohol)
- A. A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period: 
	1. Alcohol is often taken in *larger amounts* or over a *longer period than was intended*. 
	2. There is a *persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use*. 
	3. A great deal of *time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol*, use alcohol, or recover from its effects. 
	4. *Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol*. 
	5. Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a *failure to fulfill major role obligations* at work, school, or home. 
	6. Continued alcohol *use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems* caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol. 
	7. *Important* social, occupational, or recreational *activities are given up or reduced because of alcohol use*. 
	8. *Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous*.
	9. Alcohol use is continued despite *knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem* that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by alcohol. 
	10. *Tolerance*, as defined by either of the following: 
		- a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication or desired effect. 
		- b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of alcohol. 
	11. *Withdrawal*, as manifested by either of the following: 
		- The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol 
		- Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a benzodiazepine) is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms
## Specifiers: 

- Mild: Presence of 2-3 symptoms. 
- Moderate: Presence of 4-5 symptoms. 
- Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms. 
***
- In early remission (3 to 12 months) 
- In sustained remission (12 months or longer) 
- In a controlled environment
# Top 3 commonly used drugs in North America:
- Tobacco (about 25% of population) 
- Alcohol (about 15% of population) 
- Marijuana (about 5% of population)
# Pathways to Drug Dependence
- Experimentation
	- Most often in a social context
	- *No loss of control*
		- eg. Finite amount, only in certain situations, etc.
- Routine Use
	- Alterations to lifestyle and personal values
	- Borrowing, pawning, theft, lying, manipulation
	- *May still believe they have control*
- Addiction or Dependence
	- Efforts center on avoiding withdrawal symptoms
	- *Life is centered on getting the drug*
# DRUGS OF ABUSE
- **Depressants** : "Depress" CNS activity
	- Alcohol
		- Alcohol dehydrogenase is the enzyme to get rid of it
			- Low levels cause flushed face, high heart rate, increased effect
	- Barbituates
	- Opiates
-  **Stimulants** : Heighten CNS activity
	- Amphetamines
	- Cocaine
	- Nicotine
- **Hallucinogens** : distort sensory perceptions (e.g., *synesthesia*, colors, sounds, textures)
	- LSD
	- Phencyclidine (PCP)
	- Marijuana
- **Inhalants** : GABA effects
	- (GABA involved a lot in anxiety)
## Risk factors for alcohol
- Risk factors for alcoholism
	- Gender
		- Rates about equal, but women start later and progress faster.
	- Age (starting before 40)
	- Antisocial Personality Disorder
	- Family history
		- Both heritable and modeling effects
	- Sociodemographic factors
		- Lower SES (socioeconomic status) and education, Indigenous > non-Indigenous
		- The damaging effects of alcohol abuse vary across ethnic groups in Canada, likely because of different cultural constraints and biological tolerance of alcohol.
## Alcohol details
- Conceptions of Alcoholism: Disease, Moral Defect, or BehaviourPattern?
- Psychological Effects of Alcohol
- Physical Health & Alcohol
	- Alcohol-induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (aka Korsakoff's Syndrome)
		- Confusion, disorientation, recent memory loss
		- Malnutrition
		- FASD
- Moderate Drinking: Is There a Health Benefit?
	- (+) HDL
	- (-) Clotting Risk
	- 14/wk Men
	- 9/wk Women no more than 2 / day for either.